---
layout: post
title:  "A Calculated Risk: Performing Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy on Patients with End Stage Renal Disease"
tags:
    - ESRD
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---
End stage renal disease (ESRD) is a multifactorial disease linked to socioeconomic status and associated with worse surgical outcomes. We explore intraoperative and postoperative outcomes in patients with cholecystitis undergoing laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC) while adjusting for clinical, socioeconomic, and demographic variables.
<!--more-->

The Nationwide Inpatient Sample from 2005 to 2012 was used to identify adult patients that underwent LC for cholecystitis using International Classification of Diseases 9th Revision codes. Patients who underwent surgery for gallbladder disease without cholecystitis or had acute renal failure were excluded. Outcomes of interest were mortality, common bile duct injury, conversion to open, intraoperative complications, postoperative complications (mechanical, respiratory, digestive system, cardiovascular, nervous system, postoperative infections), length of stay (LOS), and total charge. Univariate analysis was performed using t-test for continuous variables and chi-square test for categorical variables. Multivariable models were created that adjusted for age, gender, race, type of insurance, income demographics, year of admission, elective status, number of Elixhauser comorbidities, and presence of end stage renal disease (ESRD).

Of 512,073 patients that underwent LC, 5,020 had ESRD. On univariate analysis, the ESRD cohort had a higher incidence of mortality (3.8% vs 0.37%, p <0.0001) and complications: intraoperative (3.0% vs 1.4%, p<0.0001), mechanical wound (1.7% vs 0.4%, p <0.0001), respiratory (3.8% vs 1.8%, p<0.0001), cardiovascular (1.6% vs 0.7%, p<0.0001), nervous system (0.1% vs 0.04%, p=0.0426), and postoperative infections (8.4% vs 5.3%, p<0.0001). ESRD patients had higher median LOS (7.0 days vs 3.0 days, p<0.0001) and total charge ($55,920 vs $27,371, p<0.0001). Multivariate analysis showed ESRD as an independent risk factor for mortality (OR 3.94, 95% CI 3.30-4.69, p<0.0001), mechanical wound complications (OR 1.90, 95% CI 1.48-2.45, p<0.0001), and intraoperative complications (OR 1.46, 95% CI 1.21-1.76, p<0.0001). Patients with ESRD were found to have decreased risk for postoperative infections (OR 0.84, 95% CI 0.75-0.94, p=0.0023). Negative binomial regression analysis showed that ESRD patients had LOS 50.4% longer than non-ESRD patients (95% CI 47.5%-53.3%, p<0.0001). Linear regression analysis showed that, after adjustment, ESRD patients had total charge 6.82% higher than non-ESRD patients (95% CI 5.02%-8.66%, p<0.0001).

In this large retrospective analysis, we find that after adjusting for clinical, socioeconomic, and demographic variables, ESRD is an independent risk factor for increased mortality, intraoperative complications, mechanical wound complications, increased LOS and cost for patients undergoing LC. Prospective studies exploring risk optimization strategies for patients with ESRD undergoing LC are warranted.